Add blog post about displacement's API changes (#688)
neuroinformatics-unit/movement: docs/source/blog/displacement-vectors.md

---
blogpost: true
date: October 27, 2025
author: Carlo Castoldi
location: Milan, Italy
category: update
language: English
---

> # Improving displacement vectors

Reviewer: The title works, but I wonder if we can make it a bit more specific. I've listed some ideas below, let me know if you like any of them better than the current title (some of them are a bit cheeky):
- Redefining displacement vectors for greater clarity
- A fresh look at displacement vectors
- Displacement revisited

Just below the title, I would add a 1-sentence summary of the whole blogpost. The first paragraph is important because it will appear as a "previw" on the "blog" page that lists all the blogposts.

I'd suggest something like this:

> This post introduces recent improvements to how `movement` computes displacement vectors, making the definitions more explicit, flexible, and intuitive for users.

Computing locomotion features is a core utility since early versions of `movement`, when they where first introduced by [@lochhh](https://github.com/lochhh) in [#106](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/pull/106) for [v0.0.13](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/releases/tag/v0.0.13)—we are now at [v0.10.0](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/releases/tag/v0.10.0).
For a library focused on tracking analysis and motion quantification, it's essential that key information, such as the total distance traveled or the tracking point's location in adjacent frames (next or previous), can be easily calculated. That's why we introduced {func}`compute_displacement <movement.kinematics.compute_displacement>` so early on: it's a function that some of you may have used to have a grasp of your tracking data, and it is also featured in our {ref}`compute and visualise kinematics <sphx_glr_examples_compute_kinematics.py>` example<!--#compute-displacement-vectors heading-->.

> Its implementation, however, produces results of complex interpretability. It defines, for a given individual and keypoint at timestep `t`, a vector that points to the opposite direction of its previous position at time `t-1`.

Reviewer: I would expand this paragraph to provide some more motivation for the change, sth like this:

```suggestion
Its original implementation, however, produced results that were difficult to interpret. For a given individual and keypoint at timestep `t`, displacement was defined as the vector pointing from the previous position at `t-1` to the current position at `t`. This definition is somewhat counter-intuitive: it indicates where the point _came from_ rather than where it is _going_, and it does not allow for computing displacement vectors that point forward in time, i.e. from `t` to `t+1`.
```

Author: The previous situation was a bit more counter-intuitive than computing vectors that point where it  came from (i.e. backward displacements). The direction was opposite too.

```suggestion
Its original implementation, however, produced results that were difficult to interpret. For a given individual and keypoint at timestep `t`, displacement was defined as the vector pointing from the previous position at `t-1` to the current position at `t`. This definition is somewhat counter-intuitive: it indicates the _opposite_ direction from where the point _came from_, and it does not allow for computing displacement vectors that point forward in time, i.e. from `t` to `t+1`.
```

For this reason, during the Hackday for [OSW 2025](https://neuroinformatics.dev/open-software-summer-school/2025/index.html) and as my first contribution to `movement`, I [offered myself](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/osw25-hackday/issues/16) to work on a more intuitive interface for displacement vectors, supervisioned by [@sfmig](https://github.com/sfmig).

> In an inspiring collaborative effort to simplify the user experience, we are pleased to present the key changes introduced in [#657](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/pull/657). This update provides an elegant, well-tested, and thoroughly documented solution that reduces the mental load on users.

Author: definitely better, thank you!

> __API changes__

Reviewer: Do you think this section would benefit from adding an image like the one below? If you think it helps I'm happy to push it to the PR, after you're done implementing my other suggestions.

![](image.png)

Reviewer: Hey @carlocastoldi, do you think you'll be able to make the final pass on this within the week?
I think we're very close to being done here. Let me know what you think of my modified figure and the other couple of unresolved comments.

  # Use:
  displacement = -kin.compute_backward_displacement(ds.position)
  ```

__Breaking changes__

- We have slightly modified the behaviour when converting vectors from Cartesian to polar coordinates. For simplicity and interpretability, {func}`cart2pol <movement.utils.vector.cart2pol>` now always sets the angle `phi` to 0 when the norm `rho` of the vector is 0, instead of following [C standard](https://www.iso.org/standard/29237.html) for [`arctan2`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atan2). This should not be a breaking change because when a vector's length is zero, it is correct to assume that the vector's direction is undefined, meaning that it could point to virtually _any_ direction.

## Conclusions

I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to the [Neuroinformatics Unit](https://neuroinformatics.dev/) for fostering an exceptional open environment that has even inspired me to enhance my own projects. Their efforts have motivated me to make [BraiAn](https://silvalab.codeberg.page/BraiAn/) more accessible to inexperienced researchers, to improve its interoperability and to develop automated pipelines for software verification.

> I am firmly convinced that bridging the gap between experimental laboratories is crucial for enabling reproducible and comparable results across research groups. I have long _believed_ that the development and adoption of shared standards and widely accepted platforms can facilitate this goal. The Neuroinformatics Unit has not only reinforced my conviction but also _demonstrated_, through their remarkable work, that this vision can be turned into a practical reality.

Reviewer: ❤️
